# Pumping Lemma and Closure Property

The pumping lemma states that:

If $L$ is a regular language, then there exists an integer $n > 0$ such that for every word $x \in L$ with $|x| > n$, there exists words $u, v, w$ such that $x = uvw$ and:

1. $|uv| \leq n$
2. $|v| > 0$
3. For every $i \geq 0, uv^iw \in L$

Proof of the pumping lemma:

-   Let $L$ be a regular language
-   Then a finite automata $M = (Q, \Sigma, q_0, A, \delta)$ exists such that $L(M) = L$
-   Let $n = |Q|$, the number of states in $M$
-   Choose an arbitrary $x \in L$ such that $|x| \geq n$
-   $x$ follows a path in $M$ of at least $n + 1$ states, but $M$ only has $n$ states. Therefore by the pigeonhole principle, one of the states must be passed through at least twice
-   Then, $x$ can be split into $x = uvw$ with $|uv| \leq n$ and $|v| > 0$ and
    -   $\delta^*(q_0, u) = q$
    -   $\delta^*(q, v) = q$
    -   $\delta^*(q, w) = q_1 \in A$
-   Let $i \geq 0$. From the properties above, we can see that $\delta^*(q_0, uv^iw) = q_1 \in A$, hence $uv^iw \in L$

We can use contraposition of the pumping lemma to prove that a language is not regular as well.

For example, we will prove that $L = \{a^i b^i \ | \ i > 0 \}$ is non-regular

-   Let $n > 0$
-   Choose $x = a^n b^n$. We can see that $x \in L$ and $|x| \geq n$
-   Let $u,v,w$ be given such that $x = uvw$, $|uv| \leq n$ and $|v| > 0$
-   We split $x$ such that for some $p, q$, $p + q \leq k$, $q > 0$
    -   $u = a^p$
    -   $v = a^q$
    -   $w = a^{n-p-q}b^n$
-   If $i = 0$, $uv^0w = a^{n-q}b^n \not \in L$, hence $L$ is not regular

# Closure

A class of languages $\mathcal{K}$ is closed under binary operation $\otimes$, if for every language $L_1 \in \mathcal{K}$ and $L_2 \in \mathcal{K}$, the language $L_1 \otimes L_2 \in \mathcal{K}$

For regular languages, if $L_1$ and $L_2$ are regular:

-   $L_1^*$, $L_1 L_2$ and $L_1 \cup L_2$ are regular (via regular expressions)
-   $L_1'$, $L_1 \cap L_2$ and $L_1 - L_2$ are regular (DFA-complement and De Morgan)
-   $L^R$ is regular (reverse the arrows in the NFA)

Adding/leaving out a finite sublanguage

-   Every finite language $X \subseteq_{\text{fin}} \Sigma^*$ is regular
    -   Note that not every regular language is finite. For example, $L = a^*$ is a regular language (because it can be expressed with a regular expression), but has infinitely many words
-   If $L$ is regular, and $X$ is a finite set, then $L - X$ and $L \cup X$ is regular as well

However do note that if $L_1$ is regular and $L_2 \subseteq L_1$, this does not mean that $L_2$ is regular

-   Let $A$ be any non-regular language on a finite alphabet $\Sigma$. Obviously $A \subseteq \Sigma^*$, however $\Sigma^*$ is a regular language

We can use closure properties to prove whether a language is regular. We will now prove that $L := \{ w \in \{a, b\}^* \ | \ n_a(w) = n_b(w) \}$ is non-regular

We start by assuming $L$ is regular, and define $K := a^*b^*$, which is regular by definition. Since REG is closed under intersection, $L \cap K$ is regular. However, $L \cap K = \{ a^n b^n \ | \ n \geq 0 \}$ is non-regular (proven previously using pumping lemma). This is a contradiction. Hence $L$ is non-regular

Note that we could have proven the non-regularity of $L$ using the pumping lemma directly, or identifying that it has infinitely many equivalence classes

# Decision Problems

Given some finite inputs, we give a yes/no answer. Is there an algorithm to decide for every input?

-   Given a DFA $M$ and a word $w$, is $w \in L(M)$?
